the term life cycle ' have be use within the biomedical discipline to describe the more rigid phase through which a biological organism travel throughout its life ( gilbert , @card@ ) . within nursing research it have long be recognise that patient ' need differ dependent on the life stage and that nursing itself have develop specifically to target intervention aim at promote or maintain health in childhood , school year , adolescence , adulthood and old age . life course research represent a group of methodology and conceptual issue that be relevant to research question which involve the interconnectedness of the various era of the life course . it have be use very little within nursing and health service research . however , its application in this study suggest that it be a technique which may benefit healthcare research when attempt to understand complex health behaviour .
there be many approach to examine historical experience , such as event history , culmination of experience and evaluation or interpretation of event . both prospective and retrospective design have their strength and weakness . prospective design facilitate the selection of representative sample and the ability to collect current datum . however they be often associate with problem of attrition , conditioning and expense . the methodological strength of less-expensive retrospective design lie in allow the researcher to cover a lengthy time period and instant access to longitudinal datum . unfortunately these may be at the cost of recall , memory and possible survivor bias , the risk of past event be filter through present experience and the need for participant to secure social acceptance .
the concept of the life course be introduce in the 1960s with contribution from anthropology , history , psychology , sociology and medicine . evidence from empirical research use method such as historical demography , sociology of aging , life history and longitudinal survey have all influence the current perspective of life course research . much research have centre on large prospective panel survey , such as the @card@ British birth cohort study , whose follow up of individual to the age of @card@ year indicate that inequality in self-related health be relate to social difference in material circumstance and of difference in individual skill and resource acquire in early life ( power et al. , @card@ ) .
up to the 1990s the perspective of the life course ' remain controversial as it emphasise human plasticity and the historical context of age-related pattern of behaviour and call into question the regularity of universal stage of development propose by developmental psychologist ( the life cycle ) . the life course perspective and its associate method of data collection have gain favour in the last few year due to a change in biographical method in general . for the last @card@ year the use of biographical method have move away from focus on the present situation of an individual to the perspective of whole life ( Kohli , @card@ ) or across whole family and several generation ( bertaux , @card@ ) . today the life course framework span both the traditional humanistic interest in the quality and course of human life and the alternate approach of precision of observation and analysis . o'rand state that the key building block element of the new life course paradigm be event combine in event history or trajectory that be then compare across person or group by note difference in timing , duration , and rate of change ' ( o'rand , @card@ ) . colby argue for this new perspective with a constructivist approach to life course study , recognise that the individual and social change be interconnect through mutual influence ( Colby , @card@ ) . methodological guidance specifically relate to life course study have be publish by geile and elder ( @card@ ) and more recent information be contain in the handbook of the life course by mortimer and shanahan ( @card@ ) .
@card@ . the life course paradigm
the paradigm ( fig . 1 ) , state that any point in the life span must be view dynamically as the consequence of past experience and future expectation . it include : location in time and place ( history , social structure , culture ) , link life ( influence of institution / group ) , human agency ( individual goal , sense of self ) and timing ( chronological event ) ( giele and elder , @card@ ) .
full-size image ( 29k )
fig . @ord@ the four key element of the life course paradigm . this diagram show the four key element of the life course paradigm , show the interconnection between the four element of location in time and place , link life , human agency and timing . these four element determine the possible different trajectory take over the life course . diagram be the author ' S ( cb ) own design after giele and elder , @card@ , page @card@ and page @card@ .
view within article
the first domain relate to location in time and place ' , and describe an individual ' s cultural background and period in time . individual and social behaviour involve different level of social and physical context and result in both general and individual experience . this phenomenon be term social patterning ' in the sociology literature , and be a practice that continue through time . the second , link life ' , relate to social integration . all level of social interaction , cultural , institutional , psychological interact and mutually influence individual behaviour . these social expectation or norm differ between individual but may also be similar where shared family background or experience exist , such as see in cohort study . the third , human agency ' , concern an individual ' s goal orientation . age , as it be a marker of individual development , be therefore link to human agency . however , the relationship between age and human behaviour over the life course be complex . a number of psychological control theory exist for explain human behaviour , most of which rely on the tenant that human wish to produce behaviour that be link to an event and elicit control over their environment ( white , @card@ ) . when this control fail , then there be a related negative affect when face with anticipated or actual loss of control . the life-span theory of development suggest that the emergence or transformation of behaviour over the life course be influence by both primary and secondary control ( heckhausen and Schulz , @card@ ) . it state that primary control relate to behaviour direct at the external environment and involve attempt to change the world to fit the need and desire of the individual . secondary control attempt to minimize loss due to failure and boost primary control function . it be suggest that over the life course the control will differ due to the opportunity and barrier encounter . from a constructivist perspective , the connection between age and human agency be not rigid and although influence by age norm , it be also affect by many other factor and can show great variation , as demonstrate by study of developmental regulation across adulthood ( heckhausen , @card@ ) . individual or group meet their own need as a result of active decision make and organise their life around personal or group goal , for example be economically secure or avoid pain . the life course perspective include a final dimension , timing of life ' , or strategic adaptation , to accomplish goal . individual or group respond to the timing of external event and undertake behaviour to use the resource available . the timing of life event could therefore be see as both a passive and active adaptation for reach individual or group goal and bring together the other three element , integrate historical , social and individual activity . giele and elder ( @card@ ) suggest use this model to look at an individual ' s adaptation to certain event or situation .
when seek a methodology to describe and explore the circumstance of referral due to a family history of breast cancer , the life course paradigm provide a useful theoretical framework in which to explore the referral event . the majority of study of health behaviour in the context of genetic risk for develop cancer have tend to focus on the psychological harm and benefit of this new information ( braithwaite et al. , @card@ ; schlich-bakker et al. , @card@ ) . these study have indicate that it be likely that other factor be also influence behaviour ; our interest be to try to understand the more complex interrelationship between the psychological interpretation of the information and the social and political context of the person and their family . to understand health behaviour in the context of genetic risk , it would therefore be important to select a methodology capable of take into account the wide context and a holistic view of the individual and their family .
@card@ . systematic review of the life course paradigm in healthcare literature
during the preparatory stage of the study we become aware that although the life course paradigm appear to be particularly relevant to the study , there be little publish health research which have utilise this approach . a systematic search of the follow @card@ electronic database be perform ; cinhal , psychinfo , medline , web of science , cancerlit , embase , ssci and ahci , to identify if the life course paradigm have be use within the nursing literature . on review the indexing term for each database , it be clear that none use the term life course as a major heading , therefore free-text search be perform for the term life course and nursing and then combine . this produce @card@ result . we then examine the abstract of all result for evidence of the life course paradigm . this uncovered eight result from within the health literature that have use element of the life course paradigm .
five of the paper report empirical research use a life course perspective , whilst four paper be either commentary or review paper . three paper have use the life course framework to review the existing healthcare literature within a specific field : oral healthcare ( watt , @card@ ) , mental health ( Gallo , @card@ ) and childhood onset disability ( Harrison , @card@ ) . evidence of the life course paradigm use by a prospective study of patient diagnose with coronary artery disease show that this approach can be use alongside quantitative method to give a rich insight into live with a chronic disease ( [ lukkarinen , @card@ ] and [ lukkarinen , @card@ ] ) . two paper look into the aspect of care for family member throughout the life course demonstrate the retrospective approach ( zhan , @card@ ; malone beach et al. , @card@ ) .
@ord@ application of the life course paradigm
the increase of genetic research in the last decade have result in discovery that affect the ability of health professional to give individualise risk information base on family history or dna testing ( guttmacher and collins , @card@ ) . follow the identification in @card@ of the gene responsible in most inherit breast cancer , there be a sudden demand for referral that threaten to overload the oncology service in the Uk ( wonderling et al. , @card@ ) the us ( calzone , @card@ ) , australia ( gaff et al. , @card@ ) and Europe ( Bradley , @card@ ; hopwood et al. , @card@ ) . the technique of create life course chart be describe in the context of a study aim at explore why woman at low risk ( less than @card@ % lifetime risk of develop breast cancer due to their family history ) , represent at least a quarter of referral to specialist centre .
@card@ . explore referral for a family history of breast cancer
as part of this study woman be interview to explore their experience of the referral event and also their prior interaction with health professional . the research be review by the local ethical review committee . all woman in this study have be refer to a family history breast-screening clinic for an assessment of their personal risk of develop breast cancer . this nurse-led clinic be locate within an acute surgical outpatient department of a cancer centre . the sampling strategy follow a purposeful approach , aim at maximum variation and allow for further expansion of theme emerge from the data-analysis . a total of @card@ referral letter be receive by the hospital clinic and be review chronologically . all of these be write referral from a general practitioner . batch one consist of the first @card@ letter , these be review and a sample of @card@ be choose which meet the follow criterion ; woman without a personal history of breast cancer and whose family represent a range of genetic risk . batch two consist of @card@ referral , @card@ be choose as they meet the above criterion plus purposely sample for those who be likely to be at low genetic risk , as this be emerge as an interesting area of investigation . batch three consist of @card@ referral and these be sample for the above criterion and also select for old woman over the age of @card@ year and unusual case that have not occur in the previous sample . this sampling procedure ensure that as interesting phenomenon emerge from the initial interview similar and also dissimilar case be select to increase the evidence for , or to dispute the emerge idea . of all @card@ woman , @card@ of the approach agree to participate . two interview be not able to be complete in the @card@ week timescale from referral to interview require by the study to allow recent reminiscence of the referral event . woman be send a letter and a patient information sheet from their clinician with a reply slip to the researcher , who make certain that the information have be fully understand , prior to arrange an interview . at the time of interview none of the woman have be see in clinic .
@card@ . technique and procedure of life course chart
this research use a cross-sectional retrospective design . the semi-structured interview be transcribe and analyse use constant comparison technique ( strauss and Corbin , @card@ ) but also within the separate but complementary life course paradigm ( giele and elder , @card@ ) . in this study the interview transcript be analyse by use a ground theory approach , ground theory be choose as it have the ability over other qualitative methodology to produce explanatory linkage between concept and to allow sensitivity to emerge area of interest , rather than purely a rich description . as this research be base from within a constructivist paradigm the analysis follow a ground theory approach the analysis strategy use by this study be fully describe by eaves ( @card@ ) and consist of purposeful sampling , open code , memoing , constant comparison with new datum , axial code , selective code and theoretical saturation ( eaves , @card@ ) .
complimentary to the ground theory analysis be the construction of life chart . the life chart , be the author ( cb ) interpretation base on the construct story and event describe by the woman during the interview . participant be ask towards the end of the interview to describe their own life and their experience with breast cancer from childhood to the present day , encourage them to mention specific event and feeling . the datum be standardise ' by a code framework that organise the text chronologically for time of incidence ( e.g. . for breast cancer diagnosis , clinic referral , etc . ) and also chronological age . also important be the collection of both subjective information , relate to the feeling of woman at that time and objective information such as , be an onward referral make . initially , rough diagram be make on paper indicate all the event that be mention .
the life course paradigm bring theoretical sensitivity ( in term of the life course of the participant ) to the analysis and add a complementary perspective to the ground theory analysis . in this study , woman be ask to discuss their prior experience with breast cancer in the family . therefore the woman in this study be talk about a reconstruction ' of their past , which situate the past within the immediate historical and social circumstance of the present . this have be term the presently understand past ' and other form of research such as life review have reveal how an individual repeatedly reconsider and reinterprets past event in light of a vantage point of the present ( Cohler , @card@ ) . by situating the discussion regard the family history of breast cancer and the ensue referral event in context , and by evoke the presence of the author in the study ( Denzin , @card@ ) , the research take a narrative approach to biography ( Atkinson , @card@ ) , as oppose to the realist and neo-positivist approach as describe by miller ( @card@ ) . in this study it be not the true historical situation of the past we wish to study but the current day perception of past experience in relation to breast cancer , thus take a constructivist perspective and a recognition that individual relay their interpretation of the presently understand past . one in which the researcher recognise that storyteller select the component of the story they tell ( reconstruct ) in order to convey the meaning they intend the listener to take from the story and that the historical truth of an individual ' s account of an event be not the primary issue ' ( Riesman , @card@ ) .
the novel methodology of draw life course chart have not to our knowledge be use within health service research . during data collection , life chart be create alongside code of interview and help inform the sampling strategy .
@card@ . construction of life chart
the chart be construct use the igrafix microsoft draw package with the woman ' s chronological age as the y-axis and the historical context along the x-axis . of note be social historical event such as , the start of the nhs in @card@ provide free healthcare ' , the start of the human genome project in @card@ ' , the isolation of the first hereditary breast / ovarian cancer gene , brca1 in @card@ ' and the availability of specialist family history breast screen clinic on an ad hoc basis from @card@ ' . the chart indicate affective ( period of concern , subjective turn point ' , as identify by the woman themselves , such as marriage , motherhood , bereavement , significant period of change ) and objective datum ( period of knowledge of breast cancer in the family , interaction with health professional ) . white circle represent a diagnosis event ( usually breast cancer ) in a friend or family member and the black circle be death . the arrow represent an interaction with a healthcare provider to discuss family history , or where it be raise . period of knowledge about the breast cancer history be show as a green line ( light grey ) and period of concern show as a red line ( dark grey ) . an example of the baseline chart be provide in fig . @ord@ this chart allow the researcher to visualise the timing of significant event across the life course and identify their context in term of historical significance ( e.g. . before breast cancer gene be identify ) , period of the individual life ( infancy or adolescence ) , and how the event of interest ( referral in this study ) be place against other significant event such as motherhood or personal illness . what event be chart depend on the perspective of the researcher and the main research question pose by each study . the chart be a powerful technique to help develop an interpretation of the possible interplay of event .
full-size image ( 78k )
fig . @ord@ example life chart . this show the structure of the chart with the y axis = the woman ' S age , the x axis = the historical time period of the event , the trajectory line = the woman ' s remember experience in relation to familial breast cancer , turn point or specific event , the time of diagnosis in family member , when explicit knowledge be make available about the family member diagnosis , the level of concern and any interaction with health professional .
view within article
the igrafix software also facilitate superimpose multiple individual chart , to create multi-charts . use this technique it be possible to overlay one woman ' s chart with another , which enable the similarity and variation in experience and referral pathway to be contrast and compare . one example of this be to compare the chart of those woman who have only know about the breast cancer more recently compare to those who have have the knowledge for a number of year . this enhance our understanding and a pattern emerge . although show variation in the time take between gain the knowledge that the breast cancer be in the family , to be refer , there emerge a group of woman who be motivate to seek interaction with a health professional quickly after gain the knowledge , whilst other , the sub-set show in fig . @card@ , wait a number of year .
full-size image ( 86k )
fig . @ord@ multiple life course chartsparticipants who have know about the breast cancer in the family for a number of year before referral . a multiple life course chart show @card@ woman who have a long period of knowledge about the breast cancer in the family , show the variation in number of interaction with health professional ( single and double arrow ) , time know about risk ( green / light grey line ) , time period of concern ( red / dark grey line ) , age at time of diagnosis in relative ( white circle ) and age at relative death ( black circle ) .
view within article
@ord@ findings3.1 . the contribution of the life course chart to the identification of the psychosocial process of realisation of risk
twenty four out of the @card@ woman approach agree to be interview ( @card@ % response rate ) . in total @card@ woman be interview , @card@ be refer from primary care and one from the hospital breast clinic . nineteen woman ( @card@ % ) have only one or two affected family member with @card@ ( @card@ % ) have only either a mother or a sister affect . the lifetime risk of develop breast cancer for the individual be calculate ( evans and lalloo , @card@ ) . thirteen ( @card@ % ) woman be at low ( less than @card@ % risk ) , @card@ ( @card@ % ) at medium ( between @card@ and @card@ % risk ) and @card@ ( @card@ % ) at high ( over @card@ % risk ) . all woman describe themselves as white , age range from @card@ to @card@ year . the woman be age between @card@ and @card@ year when their first relative be diagnose with breast cancer and @card@ ( @card@ % ) of the woman be below @card@ when their relative be diagnose . in @card@ family ( @card@ % ) the close affected family member be the woman ' S mother , in six case ( @card@ % ) a sister and the remain three case ( @card@ % ) involve more distant family member . unlike other study explore why woman attend family history clinic , the majority of woman in this study be from the low social class range ( @card@ / @card@ , @card@ % ) and half of the woman have no formal education after the age of @card@ .
this study , which have the referral event at its core , seem to have benefit greatly from the inclusion of life course chart to contribute to the identification of the psychosocial process of realisation of risk ( fig . 4 ) . the psychosocial process be develop from ground theory analysis in conjunction with review of the life chart in an iterative process . example be give as illustration of the datum and be not intend to show the full analysis . six initial category be identify ; personal meaningeven know my mother ' s history it never really bother me id13 ; initiation of concernit ' S too close to home id3 ; social and family influenceyou start look after yourself because you want to be there when they be old you know id136 ; action / interactioni have make the first step now id24 ; healthcare responsei think they ' d think me paranoid id3 ; hope and expectation of referralall i want be a mammogram id @ord@ the process of realisation of risk be find to be the main motivator behind the woman ' S or the health professional ' s reason for initiate referral .
full-size image ( 114k )
fig . @ord@ the psychosocial process-realisation of risk .
view within article
by use one woman ' S story , it can be see that the ability to observe and chart multiple domain can be powerful for identify conceptual process , e.g. . id @card@ ( fig . 5 ) . this @card@ year old woman have move house in @card@ and register with her local doctor . during her routine new patient interview the doctor ask if there be any cancer or heart disease in the replaced-dns have a list of them , and she ask me about heart disease , and a good few thing , so it kind of cover a lot of thing but they kind of really stick on the cancer when i mention my mother .
full-size image ( 58k )
fig . @ord@ example of life chart id @card@ confirm the realisation of risk process .
view within article
the woman explain that her mother have die a year ago of breast cancer the gp ask the age of onset ( @card@ ) say that it would be wise to check herself as it could be inherit . this be an instance of present ( focused ) realisation of risk hold by the health professional , which be not previously present in the woman . in order to make a referral the gp ask for more information relate to other family member and ask the woman to return to the surgery in a few replaced-dns do say like , she tell me to go away and think about it , and she tell me first , when i have all the information sort out that they want to know , how many people have breast cancer and the age , and when i have that information to drop it down to her .
this raise a present ( focused ) realisation of risk in the woman but do not initiate referral . the woman then go away concern but feel that she be not able to face the issue so soon after her mother ' S death and do not wish to raise the issue with the family . she evoke cope mechanism that allow her to lower her level of concern result in a more unfocused realisation of risk.i. think i be more shock first of all when Dr b ( her gp ) start explain to me , and i do , i want to get it do there and then , but i just could n't you know , it be so soon after my mother have die , and you know i be sick of cancer and i just do n't want to hear about it i know sometimes , which i should n't say , sometimes i think like let sleeping dog lie , and if it happen it happen , because you just want to push it to the back of your mind .
four year later a number of instance trigger feeling of personal vulnerabilitya friend back home have recently have to undergo aggressive therapy for a bone cancer and her father ' S sister have be diagnose with breast cancer age @card@ year , which be detect late as she do not go for replaced-dns if she do go in earlier , she might not even have have to have her breast remove , she wait @card@ month before she go in . i know she must have get a shock then , it ' S in the family and she might have want to put it to the back of her mind , but you ca n't put that to the back of your mind . do you know , that ' s go to be always there .
she feel that now be the time to act so go back to the replaced-dns i think more like as time have go on and i have get old , and i know that you ca n't run away from everything like , and i definitely want to do it now but it ' S only now , recently , because a few friend of mine have get cancer at home that i think about check it out now and something can be do about itand to hear information about myself , not my mother , not my aunt , just about me now , just i know all about their health now , this be more about me , myself now .
she specifically make the appointment to see the same gp , who be unavailable , and see another doctor instead . he be not as keen to take her issue as seriously , but say he do not know much about what be available . he hold an unfocused realisation of risk . however a referral letter be write . the woman feel pleased that something be be do and that she be now face up to the problem . she feel relieved after she have be , as she be now be care for and be expect to get surveillance . in reality this woman be at low genetic risk ( below @card@ % lifetime risk ) and would not be offer any extra surveillance when she do attend the clinic .
@card@ . the contribution of the life chart to identify two element of the realisation of risk process
the life chart facilitate the identification of two important concept , which drive the referral process , those of anticipated onset and generational transference , show by the highlight box in the process diagram ( fig . 4 ) .
@card@ . anticipated onset
the term anticipated onset ' have be apply to describe the concept of how woman feel when they acknowledge that they perceive a threat to their own health from breast cancer at a specific life stage , as demonstrate replaced-dns , you see when i be in my @card@ ' S it do n't bother me , you know , i do n't think about it or worry about it or nothing like that , but then when i start turn @card@ , that ' S when it start to prey more on my mind , and i would sit and think and worry , and then i let it go , but once i start reach @card@ now , this be when it be start to worry more now i have other thing on my mind , and like i be more active like you be then , but now as i be get old , i understand more and i be more wise , more alert and remember my mum at @ord@ you see , that ' s what ' s go through my mind . i be @card@ next year , and i have get this thing in my mind that i will get cancer . i be convince that i will get it , and that ' s what ' S frighten me . id @card@ ( @card@ year old at medium risk whose mother develop cancer at @card@ ) .
feeling of anticipated onset rely upon the woman have knowledge of what age the breast cancer have occur in their relative , but describe more than a specific chronological age . example include , i ' m close to that age now ' , i ' m in my 40s ' , it ' S in that age group ' , my mother be @card@ it will happen then ' . approach the age of onset in an affected family member be often the motivation for seek referral . this have be see in another study , relate to the decision to pursue genetic testing for inherited bowel cancer susceptibility and be term risky age ' by mcallister ( @card@ ) . a correlation between age at referral and the age at which a close family member be diagnose have be recently demonstrate ( fraser et al. , @card@ ) . however in the current study there be negative example of this ; woman who describe not be concern , even when they be a similar age to the affected relative . if other condition be present , which prevent the woman think about possible vulnerability then no anticipated onset be describe . the reason why these woman do not have associate feeling of vulnerability be likely due to other contextual factor . the life map help highlight this concept by highlight particular event such as care for a sick relative or have financial difficulty and therefore not feel able to address personal health concern . also the ability to chart the age of the affected relative onto the woman ' s own personal chart be a powerful indicator that this be a life period where feeling of vulnerability often arise . this ability to link life help formulate the development of the theory of realisation of risk .
@card@ . generational transference
the woman in this study , when create mean out of current event , seem to draw upon past experience of similar event or experience in their history . they sometimes articulate remember ' their relative and begin to put themselves in their place , often when social role become similar , such as motherhood . we have use the term generational transference ' to describe the concept of personally relate to an affected family member ' s social role , appearance or personal situation that result in a raise concern about your own circumstance in relation to vulnerability to illness and death . woman who describe this phenomenon be often approach a similar stage in the life course , such as the age of onset of cancer in a relative ( anticipated onset'as describe above ) a similar social role , have child at a similar age to the child of the affected relative at the time of illness , have family responsibility , or even just a similar personal appearance . example of this be give below . the importance of personal family experience have be highlight in many study , a similar concept , likeness ' , have be recently describe by walter and emery ( @card@ ) as part of their propose model of familial risk replaced-dns big worry be , you see what it be with my mum die so young , you see my mum be only @card@ when she pass away , and i feel be that what be go to happen to me . i be go to be take by this illness and my child be go to be leave young , like i have get a young brother as well who be only like @card@ when my mum pass away , and i be so terrify of that happening while i have get my little one . id @card@ ( @card@ year old woman who have a @card@ year old son ) .
where example of generational transference occur in the story of the woman the occurrence often lead to feeling of increase personal vulnerability . the health behaviour associate with the feeling be often facilitate or constrain by contextual factor such as the availability of a clinical service . the x-axis on the life chart show the rapid pace of development in scientific understanding of inherited breast cancer ( @card@ ) and also the lag between scientific discovery and the availability of specialist clinical service ( @card@ ) .
@card@ . initiation of referral
fifty eight interaction with health professional be describe by the woman in this study ( @card@ interaction have lead to the current referral event and @card@ historical interaction ) . these interaction be code as belong to one of three group . woman who self-initiate the appointment directly to discuss their family history ( self-direct ) @card@ % ( @card@ / @card@ ) , woman who initiate the discussion opportunistically when attend for another reason ( self-indirect ) @card@ % ( @card@ / @card@ ) and those woman whose interaction be initiate by the action of a health professional ( hp initiate ) @card@ % ( @card@ / @card@ ) . both a focus risk realisation ' and the co-existing presence of personal vulnerability ' seem to drive the referral process towards a more active pathway to onward referral . the level of personal vulnerability ' express by the woman seem to be correlate with their pathway . woman who travel an active pathway to referral ( those who initiate interaction directly ) seem more likely to have perceive a personal vulnerability ' . woman without feeling of personal vulnerability tend to travel an inactive path and those who have be refer on the advice of health professional travel a more passive pathway . the amount of vulnerability feel by the woman seem to drive the referral process forward . those woman travel an active pathway be likely to gain an onward referral ( @card@ % gain referral ) as oppose to those woman travel an inactive ( opportunistic ) pathway ( @card@ % gain referral ) .
there be some case where woman do express feeling of high vulnerability but who do not seek referral . these case be important as they highlight that in circumstance , where woman have high level of concern about vulnerability but also hold an unfocused view of their risk ' they seem less likely to gain onward referral . in some case a referral be make , but this be nearly always due to the woman perceive that the health professional realise a risk ' and feeling oblige to refer onwards . in other case the woman perceive that the health professional do not feel there be a risk ( absent realisation of risk ) and discuss the issue with the woman , who do not hold focus idea about what she expect to gain from referral with the result that no onward referral be make . a model suggest the likelihood of referral initiation be show by fig . @ord@ as this study only interview the woman follow the referral event and not the health professional , the state of risk realisation show by the health professional be a subjective measure .
full-size image ( 48k )
fig . @ord@ propose model to predict the likelihood of a referral event take place from primary care to specialist service .
view within article
@ord@ discussion
the use of the life course paradigm as a theoretical framework and the novel development of life chart help define the core psychosocial process occur to initiate referral in the context of a perceive familial risk . the life chart allow visualisation of a number of factor include historical context , current age , life stage and timing of other relevant event such as death of a relative or diagnosis of chronic disease . the choice of what item be relevant to plot depend upon the research question and the event the individual or researcher wish to mark as relevant . this analytical approach be complementary to ground theory , from gather the information to question the representation of the life chart . this methodology could be use to address many nursing and healthcare related research question which have a complex interplay of health , social , psychological and historical factor . as the life course paradigm have already be use theoretically to chart chronic illness it could be that life course chart could be develop to help understand health behaviour in many chronic disease , the life chart could be use in conjunction with the participant and draw together . life course chart therefore have strong utility in the understanding and management of health-related risk . their use in the field of health promotion could be beneficial . it be propose that the construction of life course chart could be beneficial in explore the life experience of patient in other area of nursing practice . diagram of family dynamics and genograms be currently use as part of family therapy , and it be possible that the historical context provide by the life chart approach could be helpful in discuss change or event history within a family , especially use the ability to layer each individual chart to create a multiple chart for the family . nursing practice often require exploration of the circumstance lead up to an illness and also the trajectory of the illness and healing process . the ability to discuss this with patient and ask them to tell you their story have already prove an important part of nursing . it be possible that a life chart allow a pictorial representation of this story , that can be contrast with other and use to explore the patient own journey .
in this study , the life chart help demonstrate that referral , rather than be motivate by valid genetic risk , be greatly influence by the psychological , social or health concern of the woman . the model of the likelihood of initiation of referral could be test further to see if the combination of risk realisation by the woman and their health professional do predict the likelihood of referral . this study provide some evidence to suggest that when health professional be knowledgeable about the genetic risk and have the time to elicit personal concern , concern can be often resolve within primary care or the woman can make an informed decision to agree to onward referral .
a recent review of qualitative research relate to familial risk highlight a number of the concept identify in this research study and confirm the importance of qualitative methodology in identify issue important to the individual in this context ( walter et al. , @card@ ) . both qualitative and quantitative method can be utilise within the life course paradigm . how the tool of the method be use depend upon the basic philosophical belief about enquiry as hold by the researcher . the exemplar study describe here use both ground theory methodology and life course chart from within a constructivist framework , allow the woman themselves to construct their life story of experience relate to their referral from primary care . this dual approach allow the use of some of the technique for enhance theoretical sensitivity from the ground theory analytical tool-kit ' to be apply to the life chart , such as question , compare and look for exceptional case .
the action of woman in this study suggest that they be appraise their situation in term of a threat or concern and often approach health professional directly . the outcome of such an approach seem dependant upon the availability of national health service resource , in term of knowledgeable health professional or specialist clinic . by plot each of the @card@ interaction with health professional onto the chart we find in this study ( in contrast to the two questionnaire study below ) that these woman could not easily articulate why or to what service they have be refer , especially those who have be refer follow advice from a health professional . a range of motivation for seek referral be find by van asperen et al . ( @card@ ) who ask @card@ woman by a postal questionnaire to select from a pre-defined list of @card@ motive , why they be attend a cancer genetics clinic . they conclude that woman have their own unique combination of motive for attend , often influence by sociodemographic factor such as age and whether they have young child ( van asperen et al. , @card@ ) . more detailed insight be gain by Fraser et al . ' S ( @card@ ) study of @card@ individual refer ( @card@ % instigate by a hospital doctor or gp , @card@ % at own instigation and @card@ % by other ) to Uk cancer genetics service . this study again ask participant to select on a scale of @card@ - @card@ the importance of a set of @card@ motivational factor . they report that screening be rate as more important by those with child , along with those who perceive their risk of develop cancer as much high than average , and those who be categorise as have high level of cancer worry . similar to brain et al . ( @card@ ) , they find that old people be more interested in attend in order to find out about the risk to other family member . in the above study it be difficult to assess if participant have pre-formed motivation or be prompt by select from a pre-defined list .
this be one of only a few study to primarily involve woman at low genetic risk who have be refer from primary care . in effect , this group represent by far the large population affect by have a family history of breast cancer ' . in total , @card@ % of adult woman in the Uk have have a close relative develop breast cancer . although this group would not necessarily be expect to benefit from intensive surveillance , this research provide evidence that many woman at low genetic risk be worry and seek information from health professional . this be in agreement with phelps et al . ( @card@ ) where woman at low risk be less satisfy with receive information regard their risk assessment by letter , and want more information , than those at moderate risk ( phelps et al. , @card@ ) . this highlight the important concern that health professional can sometimes raise concern unnecessarily due to the provision of inappropriate advice ( hetteberg et al. , @card@ ; [ kirk , @card@ ] and [ kirk , @card@ ] ; kirk et al. , @card@ ; Metcalfe and burton , @card@ ) . the study identify @card@ interaction with health professional , @card@ / @card@ ( @card@ % ) do not result in onward referral . currently new technology be be develop , such as computer programme , that should allow health professional in primary care access to information on which to base an accurate risk assessment ( braithwaite et al. , @card@ ; wilson et al. , @card@ ) be be pilot . as nurse , doctor and other work in healthcare setting be more frequently become face with question concern familial risk , it be important that they be able to ellicit the potential motivation behind a referral for specialist risk assessment , before make a judgment base solely on statistical risk .
the result from this life course study raise more question in the complex area of the illness-health divide . many of the existing theory of health behaviour rely on a start point of either illness or health . health behaviour be too often represent by theoretical approach which stress cognitive process as determinant of behaviour . a meta analysis of study use the well-known model of theory of reasoned action and theory of planned behaviour , show that only @card@ - @card@ % of the variance of intention and @card@ - @card@ % of the variance of behaviour be explain by the model ( Sutton , @card@ ) . evidence from this study show that woman feel that they be at risk from different threatsfrom illness , from carry a faulty gene and from loss of ability to maintain social role . it be perhaps important to consider this when design instrument to measure health behaviour in the context of have a family history ' of illness . the model of familial risk perception be develop in @card@ by walter and emery from interview with @card@ individual at risk from chronic disease due to their family history ( walter and emery , @card@ ) . our study concur with many of the finding from this model . the concept of anticipated onset and generational transference be also similar to the theme of likeness and perceive closeness mention in walter and emery ' S study ( @card@ ) .
both the psychosocial process of realisation of risk ' and the model of familial risk perception ' have element in common with Leventhal ' s theoretical work , the common sense model of self regulation , which arise from the observation that both cognitive and emotional representation of the threat be appraise before an attempt be make to control the threat ( leventhal et al. , @card@ ) . Walter et al . have recently map the result of their study onto element of this model and have theorise that this could be a helpful way of understand familial risk ( walter and emery , @card@ ) .
@ord@ conclusion
two question lie at the hub of most traditional social science life course research : how have individual be affect by social change and how have the life course situation of some group actually influence social change ? the purpose of this article have be to highlight the value that life course research methodology could bring to nursing research . possible question to consider be : how have patient be affect by our healthcare system and how have the life course situation of certain patient influence healthcare change ? this article have show that the life course paradigm allow a broad understanding of health behaviour by place behaviour in its social and political context and also widen the focus from purely psychological determinant to include a temporal element as well as environmental , economic , social and behavioural determinant of chronic disease .
the life chart use in this study be draw by a computer package , however it be possible to discuss and draw an individual ' s life chart with pen and paper . it would be interesting to develop the technique further with the option of more dynamic life chart at the time of interview . we conclude that the novel method of life course chart help to highlight similarity and difference relate to a common event , make this a valuable method for examine nursing practice and patient experience .
acknowledgement
we wish to thank the woman who participate in this study and dr. alison metcalfe for her advice and helpful comment on the manuscript .
