Across the world, many policy-making organisations formally consider evidence from health technology assessment (HTA) to inform their decision-making processes. These include the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) and the Scottish Medicines Consortium (SMC) in the UK, the Common Drug Review (CDR) in Canada, and the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) in Australia. Many of these HTA agencies are grappling with the competing demands of rigour versus relevance [1]. Technology assessments must follow a robust and transparent process to ensure confidence in the quality of their product and the equity of the process. However, a tension exists as policy-makers require rapid results to alleviate concerns about the timeliness of verdicts and to address accusations that they are implementing rationing by delay [2] and [3]. Currently, there is considerable interest in the fitness for purpose of the products of HTA. In particular little is known about the implications, both in terms of process and findings, of telescoping the HTA process.
The situation in England and Wales is unique, in that NICE operates two technology appraisal processes: the full Technology Appraisal Process and the recently introduced rapid Single Technology Appraisal (STA) Process. Within NICE's Full Technology Appraisal process, evidence used to inform the deliberations of NICE's Appraisal Committees includes Technology Assessment Reports (TARs), which include a systematic review and economic model developed by independent Assessment Groups, as well as submissions from the product manufacturer, professional bodies and patient groups. Even if a manufacturers' submission is weak, their technology may still be supported because of the case made for it by the Assessment Group. Within this process, the burden of proof' rests with NICE and the Assessment Groups. The entire process takes approximately 51 weeks from inception of the appraisal to production of the final appraisal document (FAD) [4]. In 2003, the World Health Organisation (WHO) praised NICE's Full Technology Appraisal process, stating that: NICE has developed a well-deserved reputation for innovation and methodological developments that represent an important model for technology appraisals internationally [5]. However, NICE has drawn criticism by some as being slow and expensive and a House of Commons Health Select Committee inquiry is underway [2].
In response to increasing pressures to reduce the time from regulatory approval of new technologies through to their introduction into NHS practice, NICE's STA process was established in 2005. NICE's STA process differs from the full appraisal process in that the manufacturer's submission to NICE forms the principal source of evidence, and the burden of proof is shifted entirely to the manufacturer. The manufacturer's submission is expected to contain an evaluation of the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of the technology using a decision-analytic approach, using STA guidelines developed by NICE [6]. Independent Evidence Review Groups (ERGs) are charged with the task of critically appraising the manufacturer's submission and identifying gaps in the evidence presented and producing reports (ERG reports). The timescales from inception of the appraisal to production of the FAD are much shorter for STAs, taking around 34 weeks. Within the STA process, there are no resources for the ERG to extend the manufacturer's analysis or to produce an independent systematic review or cost-effectiveness model. As a result, a technology could obtain a negative recommendation merely because of a poor submission, rather than being poor value for money intrinsically. As the name implies, a technology is appraised with a single comparator therefore a comparison of more than two technologies for the same condition is not feasible within the STA process. When the STA process was initially introduced, concerns were raised that it may be a less robust process for producing guidance on the use of health technologies [7].
The first two technologies appraised within the STA process were docetaxel and paclitaxel for the adjuvant treatment of early breast cancer. Both technologies were originally nominated to be appraised within NICE's full TAR process in October 2005, but were subsequently transferred to the STA process upon its introduction in November 2005. In parallel, the full TAR was transferred by the UK National Coordinating Centre for Health Technology Assessment (NCCHTA) to their independent process for completion as a monograph. Consequently, this represented a unique instance whereby the same two therapies were appraised separately within the STA process and an assessment of both technologies was undertaken together within a full TAR. The aim of this study is draw upon this unique opportunity to compare and contrast the outputs of the NICE STA process (the two ERG reports) with the TAR for the same technologies.
2. Methods2.1. Documentary analysis
The HTA reports included in this study were analysed using documentary analysis. Documentary analysis is an established methodology that provides access to procedural knowledge and allows the analysis of formalised records of the truth [8]. Documentary evidence can provide the researcher with a wealth of rich and detailed data [9]. Such analysis is appropriate to the Health Services Research context having been previously used to examine such documentary sources as clinical practice guidelines and Health Improvement Programmes [9] and [10]. In this instance, we were exclusively interested in the content, rather than the context, of the three reports. Attention was neither focused on the context within which the documents were produced nor on their subsequent impact on external decision-making processes.
2.2. Documentary evidence sources and themes
Three reports were analysed in this study: the docetaxel ERG report [11], the paclitaxel ERG report [12] and the docetaxel/paclitaxel TAR [13]. All three reports are available in the public domain, and each report was produced independently by different teams using standard templates. Content analysis was therefore used to compare the three reports, which represent the documentary evidence sources. Familiarisation with the data involved reading through the three documents. A data extraction form was developed to record information on the following key themes, which were based on the main sections of the report templates: decision problem;
 literature searching;
 clinical effectiveness review;
 cost-effectiveness analysis.
Two reviewers, both of whom have many years experience working on NICE assessments, independently extracted data on these themes from the reports (EK and PT). EK extracted data on the decision problem, literature searching, and clinical effectiveness while PT extracted information on the cost-effectiveness analysis. A common framework, based on the data extraction form, was used to ensure that the same critical points were examined in detail. Information on each of the key themes was summarised. The principal findings were summarised and presented in tables and narrative synthesis.
3. Results3.1. Decision problem
The decision problem or scope in HTA is usually defined in terms of population, intervention, comparators and outcomes [14]. The questions defined in each of the reports differed slightly from one another. Within the TAR, the question used was that initially determined by NICE and looked at women who have had surgery for early stage breast cancer. The manufacturers themselves determined the questions used in the two STA sponsor submissions. The docetaxel STA looked at women with early node-positive breast cancer (excluding women with high-risk node-negative disease) and the paclitaxel STA looked at women with early stage operable breast cancer who are candidates for cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens regardless of oestrogen receptor status. The decision problems addressed in the three reports are described in Table 1.
Table 1.
Decision problem addressed in each report
HTA monographSTA-docetaxelSTA-paclitaxel PopulationWomen who have had surgery for early stage breast cancer (subgroups: age, nodal status, oestrogen receptor positive vs. negative and progesterone receptor positive vs. negative; HER2 positivity; prognostic status-however evaluated)Women with early node-positive breast cancer (excluding women with high-risk node-negative disease)Women with early stage operable breast cancer who are candidates for cytotoxic chemotherapy regimens regardless of oestrogen receptor status Intervention(s)Docetaxel or paclitaxel as part of a chemotherapy regimen, alone or in combination with anthracycline, including instances where the taxane was substituted for one or more drugs generally administered in the regimen, administered adjuvant to surgical resectionDocetaxel within licensed indication (women with early node-positive breast cancer)Not clearly described by manufacturer, ERG used licensed indication (for node positive breast cancer following anthracycline and cyclophosphamide therapy) Comparator(s)Non-taxane, anthracycline containing chemotherapy regimenFAC or FEC100AC-P vs. doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide (AC) OutcomesOverall survival, disease-free survival, local and distant recurrence, adverse events/toxicity, health-related quality of lifeDisease free survivalDisease free survival and overall survival Study typeRCTsPhase III RCTsNot reported
Full-size table
FAC: Fluorouracil, doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide, FEC: fluorouracil, epirubicin and cyclophosophamide, AC-P: doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide followed by paclitaxel.
View Within Article
3.2. Literature searching
The electronic search strategies presented in the three documents are outlined in Table 2. The search strategies used in the TAR were more extensive than the search strategy used in the docetaxel sponsor submission. The docetaxel ERG team re-ran the Medline strategy described in the sponsor submission and did not identify the submission's key study with this search. The paclitaxel manufacturer did not provide a search strategy, although the ERG team undertook searches in four electronic databases for the sake of completeness.
Table 2.
Description of searching reported in the three documents
TARDocetaxel STAPaclitaxel STA - 12 databases searched - Searches in Medline, Embase, Cochrane Central Register and ASCO only - No search strategy provided by manufacturer - Trial registers and conference proceedings - Internal company data sources - the ERG team undertook searches in Medline, Embase, Cinahl and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled trials - Hand searching of relevant systematic reviews - Medline search rerun by ERG team but this did not identify submission's key study
Full-size table
View Within Article
3.3. Clinical effectiveness review
Table 3 presents details of the trials identified in the three reports. The TAR identified 11 trials of clinical effectiveness for docetaxel reporting outcomes relating to survival, disease progression, quality of life and safety. The docetaxel ERG report listed five trials identified by the manufacturer in their submission (all five identified in the TAR). The ERG team identified three additional trials. Therefore, three of the trials reported in the TAR were not assessed in the ERG report, although one was mentioned. This discrepancy is partly due to timing, as the TAR was completed a short while after the STAs, and partly due to the definition of slightly different decision problems. In addition, the ERG team briefly mentioned three trials, all of which had been excluded by the TAR as they did not fit the inclusion criteria (ADEBAR, EORTC, E1199).
Table 3.
Clinical trials included in the three reports
HTA TAR docetaxel included trialsDocetaxel ERG report BC1RG 001Included by sponsor ECOG 2197aIncluded by sponsor PACS 01aIncluded by sponsor USO 9735aIncluded by sponsor BIG 2-98aNR TAXIT 216aNR (mentioned by ERG team) TACTaIdentified by ERG team GEICAM 9805aIncluded by sponsor RAPP01Identified by ERG team PACS 04NR GOIM 9902Identified by ERG team HTA TAR paclitaxel included trialsPaclitaxel ERG report NSABP B28Included by sponsor CALGB 9344Included by sponsor HCOGNR ECTOaNR GEICAM 9906aNR Elling phase 2NR MIG 5aNR
Full-size table
a Abstract only; NR: not reported in the ERG report.
View Within Article
For paclitaxel, the TAR identified seven trials of clinical effectiveness. The paclitaxel ERG report described three trials reported by the manufacturer along with two trials additional to the sponsor submission identified by the ERG team. Two of these additional trials along with one identified by the manufacturer had been excluded from the TAR as they did not meet the TAR inclusion criteria. Therefore five trials included in the TAR were excluded from the STA process.
3.4. Overview of taxanes cost-effectiveness models
The TAR and the two STA sponsor submissions each presented mathematical models used to estimate the incremental cost-effectiveness of docetaxel and paclitaxel in comparison to current standard treatments. There were considerable differences between the models in terms of the current standard treatments against which taxane regimens were compared, structural assumptions employed within the models, and data sources used to inform the model structure and parameter values.
The populations included in the three models were similar; each model included women aged around 50 years with node positive breast cancer. The scope of the TAR model was broader than the models reported within the STA submissions, including twelve economic comparisons of docetaxel and/or paclitaxel against each other or non-taxane-including therapy. The paclitaxel STA model included four marginal comparisons of paclitaxel or docetaxel against non-taxane-including therapy; this STA submission also reported incremental comparisons between competing treatment options, however these inappropriately ignored the principles of dominance or extended dominance. The docetaxel STA model included only two comparisons of docetaxel in comparison to non-taxane-including therapies. Each of the three models presented health outcomes in terms of the marginal or incremental cost per QALY gained, although the docetaxel STA sponsor submission also reported cost-effectiveness in terms of the incremental cost per life year gained. All three economic analyses reported expected costs and health effects from the perspective of the NHS. The TAR model set out to include Personal Social Services (PSS) costs, while the docetaxel STA sponsor submission considered hospice costs in the sensitivity analysis. The paclitaxel STA sponsor submission model did not include PSS costs for recurrence or follow-up. All of the analyses applied discounting at a rate of 3.5% for costs and health outcomes.
The TAR and the two STA sponsor submissions reported the use of the state transition methodology to estimate the long-term costs and consequences of treating patients with taxanes and non-taxane-including regimens. The state transition methodology is particularly useful for modelling diseases or conditions, whereby risk is ongoing over time, where events may occur more than once and where the timing of events is important [15]. Health states were similar within the models reported in the TAR and the paclitaxel STA sponsor submission; these included separate states for patients who were relapse-free, contralateral and locoregional relapse, distant/metastatic relapse, and death from breast cancer or other causes. The TAR model also included a remission health state. While the docetaxel STA sponsor submission model included a Markov component, the definition of health states was unclear. Costs and consequences were evaluated over a lifetime horizon within all three models (range = 35 - 40.5 years); the TAR model and paclitaxel STA sponsor submission model used an annual cycle length, while the docetaxel STA sponsor submission model used a monthly cycle length. A summary of the scope of the three health economic analyses is presented in Table 4.
Table 4.
Description of model scope
Model elementTARPaclitaxel STADocetaxel STA Modelling approachProbabilistic state transition (Markov) modelAcute initial treatment model followed by long-term Markov (state transition) modelDecision tree model augmented by long-term state transition (Markov) model describing costs and consequences of chemotherapy Health States included in model7 health states defined as (1) disease-free, (2) contralateral disease, (3) loco-regional relapse, (4) remission, (5) metastatic relapse, (6) death from breast cancer, (7) death from other causesInitial acute treatment phase (pre-Markov), followed by long-term 6-state Markov model: (1) recurrence-free survival, (2) local recurrence, (3) regional recurrence, (4) distant recurrence, (5) death due to breast cancer, (6) death due to other causesRemission health state following chemotherapy administration, with subsequent first relapse (locoregional or distant), death from other causes Model population (as described)50-year-old women with early breast cancer who are eligible to receive anthracycline-based chemotherapy with or without taxanesWomen aged 50 with operable node positive breast cancer suitable for AC + T or AC therapy. The entry age of 50 reflects the median ages of the patients in the included trialsWomen with early node-positive breast cancer Intervention(s)Docetaxel or paclitaxel as part of a chemotherapy regimen, alone or in combination with anthracyclinePaclitaxel following anthracycline and cyclophosphamideDocetaxel in combination with cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin ComparatorsNon-taxane, anthracycline containing chemotherapy regimenDoxorubicin and cyclophosphamide or doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide followed by docetaxelAnthracycline-containing chemotherapy regimens excluding paclitaxel PerspectiveNHS PSSNHSNHS (hospice costs included in sensitivity analysis) Time horizon35 years40.5 years40 years Cycle length1 year1 year1 month for Markov component Primary health economic outcomeMarginal cost per QALY gained (vs. non-taxane anthracycline-including therapy)Incremental cost per QALY gainedIncremental cost per QALY gained/Incremental cost per LYG (primary not specified) Price year2005/200620042005 (where reported in ERG report) Discount rate3.5% for costs and health outcomes3.5% for costs and health outcomes3.5% for costs and health outcomes
Full-size table
QALY: Quality adjusted life year; LYG: life year gained, PSS: Personal Social Services.
View Within Article
3.5. Modelling assumptions
Key structural modelling assumptions were documented in each of the three reports (see Table 5). Due to the differing model structures and variable quality of reporting, comparing these assumptions across the models is problematic. The expected impact of many of the modelling assumptions on the incremental cost-effectiveness of taxane therapies was not clearly reported in any of the three reports. In particular, there were differences between the three models in terms of the health states included, and assumptions concerning the nature of the hazard ratio for relapse within and beyond the duration of the clinical trials upon which the models were based.
Table 5.
Assumptions concerning model structure
AssumptionTARPaclitaxel STADocetaxel STA Patients with contralateral/loco-regional recurrence states remain in state for 1 cycle onlyYesNoNo (model simplified to evaluate overall post first-relapse outcomes) Risk of metastatic spread assumed to be the same for both contralateral disease and loco-regional recurrenceYesNoNo (separate local and regional states not defined) The hazard ratio of recurrence during the trial period is constantYesYesYes The hazard ratio of recurrence is equal between treatments (=1) following the trial periodYesNoYes Patients may experience contralateral or loco-regional recurrence only onceYesNo (patients may transit from local to regional recurrence)No (model simplified to evaluate overall post first-relapse outcomes) The survival of patients who relapse is independent of time of relapseYesYesYes The survival of patients with metastatic disease is equivalent to that of patients who are first diagnosed with metastatic diseaseYesUnclearUnclear Patients without relapse after 15 years are assumed to be curedYesNoNot explicitly modelled Death from breast cancer can only occur following metastatic relapseYesNo (direct transition allowed from local or regional recurrence)Life expectancy (and QALYs gained) modelled according to local/distant relapse and other causes The risk of other-cause mortality (non-relapsers) is assumed to be the same as for the general population of EnglandYesNot reportedYes Mortality/disease recurrence allowed during adjuvant phase adjuvant phase of treatmentYesNoYes Population stratified according to risk of relapseNo (single cohort risk)No (single cohort risk)Yes (divided into low-risk and high-risk)
Full-size table
QALY: Quality adjusted life year.
View Within Article
3.6. Cost-effectiveness results
Cost-effectiveness results reported within the TAR and the STA sponsor submissions are presented in Table 6. Each of the three reports presented central estimates of cost-effectiveness, simple sensitivity analysis and probabilistic sensitivity analysis. The TAR reported marginal cost-effectiveness results using three direct and nine indirect comparisons, the docetaxel STA reported only two direct comparisons, while the paclitaxel STA presented only one direct and three indirect estimates of marginal cost-effectiveness. Interestingly, the paclitaxel STA reported marginal and incremental cost-effectiveness estimates for both paclitaxel- and docetaxel-including treatment options, however the ERG had concerns regarding the validity of the incremental analysis.
Table 6.
Health economic results produced by TAR and STAs
Economic comparisonInterventionForm of comparisonIncremental/marginal cost per QALY gained (probability cost-effective at 30,000 per QALY gained) (1) TAR(2) Paclitaxel STA(3) Docetaxel STA DAC6 vs. FAC6aDocetaxelDirect12,418 (0.95) - 9838 (1.00) AC4 + P4 vs. AC4bPaclitaxelDirect39,332 (0.39) - - AC4 + P4 vs. AC4cPaclitaxelDirect42,672 (0.32) - - DAC6 vs. E4 CMF4aDocetaxelIndirect26,398 (0.51) - - DAC6 vs. FEC6(100)aDocetaxelIndirectDominated (0.12) - - DAC6 vs. FEC6(50)aDocetaxelIndirect158,517 (0.28) - - AC4 + P4 vs. E4 CMF4cPaclitaxelIndirectDominated (0.10) - - AC4 + P4 vs. FEC6(100)cPaclitaxelIndirectDominated (0.01) - - AC4 + P4 vs. FEC6(50)cPaclitaxelIndirectDominated (0.04) - - AC4 + P4 vs. E4 CMF4bPaclitaxelIndirectDominated (0.11) - - AC4 + P4 vs. FEC6(100)bPaclitaxelIndirectDominated (0.01) - - AC4 + P4 vs. FEC6(50)bPaclitaxelIndirectDominated (0.05) - - AC-P1 vs. ACePaclitaxelIndirect - 3713 (1.00) - AC-P3 vs. AC ePaclitaxelDirect - 4726 (1.00) - AC-D1 vs. ACeDocetaxelIndirect - 6235 (1.00) - AC-D3 vs. ACeDocetaxelIndirect - 3841 (1.00) - FEC100 T vs. FEC100DocetaxelDirect - - 8227 (0.95)d
Full-size table
a Based on trial BCIRG001.
b Based on trial CALGB9344.
c Based on trial NSABPB28.
d Derived from manufacturer's submission.
e The paclitaxel STA sponsor submission also reported pairwise incremental cost-effectiveness ratios between the treatment options presented here (e.g. AC-P1 vs. AC-D3). However, this analysis was not fully incremental, and the ERG had serious reservations regarding the relevance of these comparisons.The reader should also note that the TAR undertook some comparisons twice using alternative sources of trial evidence.Abbreviations: A: doxorubicin; P: paclitaxel; D: docetaxel; E: epirubicin; C: cyclophosphamide; M: methotrexate; F: fluorouracil.
View Within Article
The STA sponsor submissions reported cost-effectiveness estimates for docetaxel and paclitaxel which are likely to represent value for money according to current acceptable thresholds for cost-effectiveness (3713 - 9838 per QALY gained) [16]. Assuming a willingness to pay threshold of 30,000 per QALY gained, the cost-effectiveness acceptability curves (CEACs) presented in the STA sponsor submissions suggested that the probability that paclitaxel and docetaxel produce a greater level of net benefit than non-taxane-including regimens was 0.95 or higher.
Importantly, only one common health economic comparison was made across the three reports (DAC6 versus FAC6). The TAR and the docetaxel STA sponsor submission reported similar cost-effectiveness results for this comparison (TAR estimate = 12,418 per QALY gained; STA estimate = 9838 per QALY gained). In contrast, the cost-effectiveness estimates for paclitaxel reported in the TAR were considerably less favourable than those reported in the STA sponsor submission. Importantly, the indirect comparisons reported in the TAR suggested that both docetaxel and paclitaxel may be dominated by comparator regimens (i.e. they would produce lesser benefits at a greater cost than non-taxane-including therapy).
4. Discussion
The objective of both the full HTA and STA processes is to provide enough information for NICE's Appraisal Committees to decide whether to recommend for or against the use of new health technologies. The concurrent development of STAs on docetaxel and paclitaxel for NICE and a full HTA monograph covering both drugs provided a unique opportunity to compare the same technologies through two parallel processes undertaken by independent academic research teams. It should be noted however, that the TAR used in this analysis is not directly representative of the NICE TAR process as the TAR team had no access to company data in the sponsor submission. The TAR team did have access to the data in the sponsor submissions for the docetaxel and paclitaxel STAs, minus commercial in confidence information, as these are available on the NICE website. Public consultation was not part of this TAR process and no Appraisal Committee meeting was held.
There appears to be reason, on methodological grounds alone, to endorse the initial concerns expressed regarding the loss of independent assessment [7]. In this study we have identified problems with missing data, missing comparisons and the absence of an independent economic model. There is insufficient time and resources for extra analyses to be undertaken within the STA process. A recent comparison of industry supported reviews of drugs with Cochrane reviews concluded that they should be treated with caution as they were less transparent, had few reservations about methodological limitations of the included trials and reported more favourable conclusions than the corresponding Cochrane reviews [17]. A variety of potential biases have been identified in sponsor submissions [18] and NICE has previously accused drug companies of withholding access to patient-level data [19].
4.1. Issues of concern identified in the reports
As part of the STA process the ERG teams are requested to highlight issues of concern within the sponsor submissions. In the docetaxel ERG report, the authors identified two key issues of concern, first the reporting of significant toxicity associated with docetaxel and second the choice of a comparator not in common use in the UK. With regard to toxicity, the RAPP01 trial was terminated due to deaths from toxicity [20]. This trial of docetaxel was reported in both the TAR and the docetaxel ERG reports. However, while the trial was identified by the ERG team it was not reported by the manufacturer in their submission or used in their cost-effectiveness model. The paclitaxel ERG report identified the following issues of concern: the manufacturer provided no systematic literature review, the main comparator did not represent standard care in the UK NHS and a large number of relevant comparators including docetaxel were omitted.
While each of the three cost-effectiveness models appear to have used similar modelling methodologies, data sources and assumptions, the key issue of concern for the economic analyses concerns the differences in the scope of the economic analysis. A total of 17 economic comparisons were made within the three reports, yet only one of these was common between the TAR report and one of the taxane STA reports (DAC6 versus FAC6). Notably, the TAR report presented less favourable cost-effectiveness results than the STA reports using direct comparisons, and highly unfavourable results based on indirect comparisons.
4.2. Study limitations
There are several limitations to this study. While this study presents a unique opportunity to compare the outputs of the full HTA and STA processes for the same technologies, this also means that only one case study was possible. The same conclusions may not be reached if another drug or drugs were compared undergoing the same processes. Similarly, different conclusions might be reached if different companies or TAR or ERG teams were involved in the production of the reports. Docetaxel and paclitaxel were the first two single technologies to be appraised within the NICE STA process, and since these two STAs were completed, NICE has modified its STA process (a scoping workshop now takes place at the initiation of the process, and the submission template for manufacturers has been further developed). Further changes will no doubt take place after the current NICE review of the STA process is completed. The methods used within this comparative study are also subject to limitations. Only one reviewer extracted data for each of the key themes. Documentary analysis techniques may be constrained by the limitations of the data, either missing or incomplete data, inaccuracies in the data and inherent biases such as selective reporting [9]. However, the authors made every effort to use standard and transparent methods to limit the occurrence of such bias.
4.3. Recommendations for the future
With regard to the STA process, we have several recommendations. In this case, paclitaxel is a comparator to docetaxel yet this comparison was not made within the STA sponsor submission for docetaxel or paclitaxel. It is important that the decision problem or scope defines all relevant comparators. When two or more new technologies are available for the same condition, it may be more appropriate to assess them through the TAR process. Independent literature searching for the evidence could usefully become part of the process.
NICE has now developed a standard template for use by manufacturers when developing their submission and its use should be enforced. Likewise, standardised methods for critical appraisal of the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness evidence by the ERG teams need to be developed. While several checklists exist for critically appraising the quality of systematic reviews and cost-effectiveness models, there is little consensus concerning the most appropriate for use in this context. Importantly, there are no standardised methods for assessing which information has been omitted from the systematic review or model. However due to the nature of the STA process, there is limited scope for independent analyses. One option would be to fast track the existing NICE TAR process by speeding up topic selection, allocation and scoping and shortening the consultation periods.
It is inevitable that HTA processes will be subject to constant pressure for change from interested parties. Manufacturers, professionals and patients press for quick (and usually favourable) decisions about new therapies; health commissioners such as Primary Care Trusts, who have to manage with a fixed budget press for careful consideration of value for money. Manufacturers, whose product is at risk of rejection, press for greater transparency and consultation within the decision making process so that they may challenge adverse rulings (at the expense of greater time to a decision) and the Treasury tries to limit expenditure on the whole process [21]. Manufacturers do not necessarily apply the same level of transparency to their own submissions.
Other countries have attempted to deal with these pressures by developing rapid appraisal systems. The system used by PBAC in Australia takes between 23 and 30 weeks [22], CRD in Canada takes 20 - 26 weeks [23] while the SMC in Scotland takes 16 weeks [24]. All three of these agencies, as well others, such as Belgium [25], produce guidelines or templates for manufacturers' submissions, including varying degrees of detail. These guidelines are supposed to increase transparency in reporting and standardise methodologies for economic evaluations. However they are not always adhered to by manufacturers nor enforced by the agencies. NICE uses independent academic institutions to critically appraise sponsor submissions as does the CRD. The SMC uses its own working group of health professionals while PBAC uses an economic subcommittee of about 10 people, mainly economists and epidemiologists.
The introduction of the STA process was an attempt to reduce the time and cost of NICE appraisal processes. What is clear from this study is that the change has had certain unintended consequences and that NICE should reconsider how STAs are conducted in terms of quality and process (this NICE is already doing) and to continue to use the standard full TAR process in many cases.
5. Conclusions
While the STA process provides the opportunity for rapid appraisal of new health technologies, there remains uncertainty concerning the extent to which STAs adequately address the specific decision problem under consideration.
Conflicts of interest
The authors have no competing interests. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS RD HTA programme. Any errors are the responsibility of the authors.
Acknowledgements
Alicia O'Cathain advised on the methodology used in this work and commented on the manuscript. John Brazier also commented on the manuscript.